
===== PAGE 1 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 1 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Reasonable and Necessary Supports 
Quick summary: there are new laws about what we can and can’t fund under the NDIS. All 
NDIS supports need to meet each of the reasonable and necessary criteria before we can 
fund them in your plan. For example, supports need to relate to your disability support 
needs, be value for money, and effective and beneficial. We also need to make sure each 
support is an NDIS support. This means it’s a service, item, or equipment that can be funded 
by the NDIS. Examples of NDIS supports include support with personal daily living tasks and 
accessing the community, therapeutic supports, and personal mobility equipment. 
Note: 
• When we say 'your plan' we mean your NDIS plan. 
• When we say ‘disability support needs’, we mean supports you need because of your 
disability. 
• If you’re aged between 9 and 65 years and are looking for information about 
community connections, go to Our Guideline – Community Connections. 
• If your child is younger than 9 and you’re looking for information about early 
connections, go to Our Guideline – Early Connections. 
• As part of the recent changes to the NDIS laws we are moving towards a new 
framework for planning. Rules need to be developed for this new framework. We’re 
working on how and when we’ll introduce these changes. 
Until then, the information in this Our Guideline is about our ‘old framework’ for 
planning, which include the legislative changes that become operational when the law 
commences. All current plans will be known as 'old framework' plans, and we will 
continue to develop these until all participants have transitioned to the new 
framework. 
What’s on this page? 
This page covers: 
• What are reasonable and necessary supports? 
• How do we make decisions about what is reasonable and necessary? 
• How do we include the reasonable and necessary supports in your plan? 
• What if you don’t agree with our decision? 
  

===== PAGE 2 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 2 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
You may also be interested in: 
• Mainstream supports 
• Creating your plan 
• Changing your plan 
• Reviewing our decisions 
• Would we fund it? 
What are reasonable and necessary supports? 
The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) was set up as a world first approach to 
disability support. It puts people with disability at the centre of decision-making, through the 
principles of reasonable and necessary supports and individual choice and control. 
We provide funding for reasonable and necessary supports to people with a permanent and 
significant disability or developmental delay. 
Reasonable and necessary supports are the supports we fund in your plan to meet your 
disability needs. All NDIS supports we fund in your plan need to meet the criteria set out in 
law for the NDIS of what we can and can’t fund.1 For information on what is an NDIS support 
and what is not, go to NDIS support. 
NDIS supports should complement, not replace, other supports available to you. That’s why 
we consider: 
• the things you’re able to do for yourself 
• support you have from others in your network, including family members, relatives, 
friends, local community services and mainstream government services. 
Once we’ve considered your situation, we need to follow the rules determined under the law 
for the NDIS in our planning decisions.2 
This guideline explains how we decide what reasonable and necessary supports must 
consider, which we’ll explain in detail. 
When creating your plan, we also follow these principles. 
We also have Would we fund it guides. They have examples of how we decide if we fund 
different types of supports. 
How do we make decisions about what is reasonable and necessary? 
When we create your plan with you, we’ll discuss your disability support needs.3 We want to 
help you pursue your goals, increase your independence, and help you work, study and join 
social activities. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 3 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
The NDIS will only fund a support if it meets all the reasonable and necessary criteria. We 
also won’t fund a support if the law says we can’t fund it. We explain the reasonable and 
necessary criteria in more detail further down. 
What supports can you get outside the NDIS? 
Before we decide what reasonable and necessary supports to fund in your plan, we’ll first 
discuss what other supports may be available outside the NDIS. This is an important 
information-gathering step. For example, there may be mainstream, community and informal 
supports that suit you. 
There are many supports you can get outside the NDIS. Other government and community 
services provide supports to all Australians, including people with disability. And your friends, 
family, and other people you know can often be your best supports. 
To find out more about supports you can get outside the NDIS, go to Creating your plan. 
It’s important we gather this information and help you access these services before we 
consider what reasonable and necessary supports we can fund. That way, we can help 
make sure you’re able to access mainstream, community, and informal supports wherever 
possible. 
For more information, go to Mainstream and community supports. 
What types of supports may be included in your plan? 
Your plan may include ‘general supports’ and ‘reasonable and necessary supports’.4 
General supports 
General supports are the coordination, strategic or referral services and activities we provide 
or arrange to be provided, for you.5 They’re how we help you develop your plan and connect 
with support and activities in your community. This includes the support you get from your 
early childhood coordinator or local area coordinator to connect to mainstream, community, 
and informal supports. You don’t need to pay for your general supports from your plan as the 
NDIS pays for them directly 
Reasonable and necessary supports 
Reasonable and necessary supports are the NDIS supports we fund or provide in your plan 
to meet your disability support needs.6 NDIS supports are the services, items, and 
equipment we can fund or provide under the NDIS.7 For information on what supports are 
considered NDIS supports, go to NDIS supports. 
The laws for the NDIS tell us what we can fund in your plan.8 All NDIS supports we fund in a 
plan need to meet all the criteria set out in these laws. We call these the NDIS funding 
criteria. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 4 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
• We’ll check your support types and amounts of support will complement each other to 
help you fulfil an ordinary life.9 Any funded supports must be an NDIS support10 that is 
right for you. 
• It must not be a type of support the law says we can’t fund or provide.11 
Each NDIS support must be reasonable and necessary individually, but the supports must 
also be reasonable and necessary when considered as a package of supports. 
Does the support meet the reasonable and necessary criteria? 
We can only include NDIS supports in your plan if they meet all the reasonable and 
necessary criteria.12 
This means that before we can include an NDIS support in your plan, we need to be satisfied 
it meets all the following criteria: 
• The support is related to your disability13. 
• The support will help you to pursue your goals in your plan.14 
• The support will help you to undertake activities, to facilitate your social and economic 
participation.15 This means the support will help you join in social outings, recreation, 
work and study by reducing the disability-related barriers that prevent you from 
participating. 
• The support represents value for money. This means we need to consider the costs 
and benefits of the support, as well as the costs and benefits of alternative supports.16 
• The support will be, or is likely to be, effective and beneficial for you, having regard to 
current good practice.17 This means we consider if there is evidence the support 
works for someone with similar disability support needs. We won’t need an expert 
report for every support, as we can often rely on other information or evidence. For 
example, we may have information already about whether the support is widely 
accepted to suit someone with your disability support needs.18 We also consider your 
lived experience. 
• The funding of the support takes account of what it is reasonable to expect families, 
carers, informal networks and the community to provide.19 This means we need to 
consider what support is reasonable for your family, friends and community to 
provide. 
• The support is an NDIS support for you.20 
The law for the NDIS sets out things that we need to consider when we apply the reasonable 
and necessary criteria.21 

===== PAGE 5 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 5 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
For example, funding a vehicle modification may reduce your need for other supports. By 
funding a vehicle modification in your plan, we’ll look at whether you need less support to 
access the community. 
If the vehicle modification will reduce your support needs, we might reduce the amount of 
support we fund for you to access the community. This is because the same amount of 
support might not be reasonable and necessary when the whole package of supports is 
considered. 
Is the support related to your disability? 
We’ll only fund a support if it relates to your disability.22 This means there must be a direct 
link between your disability support needs and the NDIS supports we fund. 
We consider if the support addresses your disability support needs. Your disability support 
needs are those that come from, or are caused by, your disability. 
For example, we don’t fund things like flights to go on a holiday or a gym membership to get 
fit. 
This is because you’re unlikely to need these supports because of your disability support 
needs. They are things that all people, with or without disability, might want or need. 
Example 
Alan uses a wheelchair and needs some changes to their house. They need to be able to 
independently use their bathroom and kitchen. They also want to set up an outdoor 
entertainment area for when their friends visit. 
We may be able to fund home modifications so Alan can access areas of their home, 
including their bathroom and kitchen. They need the home modification because they can’t 
access those areas due to their disability. 
Alan will need to pay for the outdoor entertainment area, as it’s not related to their disability. 
Does the support help you pursue your goals? 
We need to be satisfied that the support will help you pursue the goals, objectives and 
aspirations in your plan.23 This helps us determine if the support is necessary.24 
While we only fund supports that help you pursue your goals, objectives and aspirations, we 
understand that different people express themselves in different ways. 
Reasonable and necessary supports should help you pursue your goals,25 but you don’t 
need a specific goal for every support in your plan. When we decide if a support will help you 
pursue your goals, we consider your whole situation. 
We look at how a support will address your disability support needs, and the disability 
specific barriers that prevent you from pursuing your goals. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 6 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
A support that addresses your disability support needs is most likely to help you pursue your 
goals, objectives and aspirations in your plan. 
This means that if your goal is to ‘live independently’, we may fund home modifications that 
address your disability support needs. However, we won’t fund supports that aren’t NDIS 
supports, including day-to day-living costs like rent or utilities. These costs aren’t incurred 
solely and directly because of your disability support needs, so they don’t meet other funding 
criteria.26 
Also, choosing a different goal ‘to have a more accessible home’ won’t change the supports 
we could fund in your plan. 
Achieving goals usually takes many different kinds of supports. NDIS supports will most 
likely be just one kind of support that helps you work toward your goals. 
Learn more about setting your goals in Creating Your Plan and the Setting Goals fact sheet. 
Example 
Morgan is ready to look for work and they have a goal in their plan to get a job. They’ve built 
up their skills and know the type of work they want to do. Disability Employment Services are 
helping Morgan find work, so we can’t fund this support for Morgan. 
However, because of their disability, Morgan will need personal care supports to help them 
get ready for work in the morning. We will consider: 
• how Morgan’s disability support needs relate to their goals 
• if funding NDIS supports that address these disability support needs will help Morgan 
pursue their goals. 
Morgan’s planner determines the personal care supports meet this criteria. The supports that 
address their personal care needs will help Morgan to pursue their employment goals. 
Morgan’s planner then needs to look at if the support meets the other NDIS funding criteria. 
In this case Morgan does get personal care in their plan. Morgan doesn’t have a job yet but 
will need personal care support to help them get ready to look for work. Morgan will also be 
able to use these supports when they get a job. 
We don’t fund all the supports that relate to Morgan’s employment goals. We only fund the 
supports we consider are reasonable and necessary – that is, when they meet all the NDIS 
funding criteria. 
Does the support help you do activities that will help your social and economic 
participation? 
We need to be satisfied that the support will help you to do activities, which make it easier for 
you to participate socially and economically.27 

===== PAGE 7 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 7 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Social participation means doing things you enjoy, like going out with friends, playing sport or 
going out into the community. It also means doing the things you need to do, like going to 
school or medical appointments. 
Economic participation usually means being involved in things that help you work towards 
getting and keeping a job. This might be things like volunteering, study, learning new skills or 
trying work experience. Research tells us that work can lead to health benefits and improve 
our quality of life. Learn more about the Health Benefits of Good Work. 
Social and economic participation are important to most people. They’re critical to living an 
ordinary life. 
To work out if a support meets this criteria, we look at the purpose of the support and how it 
will help you. 
We fund reasonable and necessary supports that reduce the barriers that prevent you from 
doing activities. This will help you increase your social and economic participation. 
Some supports help economic and social participation directly. There are lots of supports we 
can fund to directly help with social and economic participation. Learn more about Social and 
recreation supports and Work and study supports. 
Other supports help you do activities like self-care, which indirectly help your economic and 
social participation. 
Example 
Sue is going to university next year. She has a vision impairment and has been working with 
her Guide Dog Mobility Instructor to decide if a Dog Guide is right for her. A Dog Guide can 
help her leave her home safely and independently, and travel to and from university. 
A Dog Guide could also help her go out with friends and join in other community activities. 
As long as it meets the other funding criteria, we could fund a Dog Guide for Sue. It will help 
her with activities of daily living. 
In Sue’s case, a Dog Guide will also increase her social and economic participation. Having 
a Dog Guide will help her get to her university independently where she studies and also has 
lots of friends. 
Is the support value for money? 
All supports we fund under the NDIS need to be value for money. This means the cost of the 
support is reasonable when we consider the benefits of the support and the cost of other 
supports. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 8 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Making sure your supports are value for money is one of the ways we keep the NDIS 
financially sustainable. This means we make careful decisions about funding so that we 
make sure the NDIS exists for future generations. It’s also one of our principles.28 
When we decide if the support is value for money, we consider: 
• if other supports would achieve the same result at a substantially lower cost.29 This 
means there should be a real or material difference in cost 
• if there’s evidence that the support will substantially improve your life stage outcomes 
and benefit you in the long term30 
• if the support will likely reduce the cost of other supports over time31 
• how the cost compares to other supports of the same kind in your area32 
• if the support will make you more independent and mean you won’t need as many 
supports in the future. For example, in some situations home modifications may 
reduce the need for support in your home. 
When we consider the likely cost of supports, we consider the cost over the long term. We 
consider if the support will help you achieve milestones at different ages or stages of your life 
and have long term benefits. 
For example, some supports like home modifications may be expensive now, compared to 
other supports. But getting these supports now may mean you need much less support in a 
few years, or later in life. Or it may delay the need for other more costly supports.33 
When determining if the cost of the support is value for money, we consider: 
• the prices for NDIS supports in the NDIS Pricing Arrangements and Price Limits 
• quotes for specific or high risk supports. 
It’s important we consider the cost of the support. This will be the level of funding we include 
in your plan, if we decide the support is reasonable and necessary. 
When we fund equipment or modifications, we also need to consider:34 
• how the cost of buying the equipment or modifications compares to the cost of renting 
them 
• if it’s appropriate to fund the equipment or modifications you want, based on your 
situation and any expected changes in technology. 
Learn more about how we consider value for money when we fund assistive technology, 
home modifications and vehicle modifications. 
  

===== PAGE 9 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 9 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Example 
Elias needs a shower commode. 
He got an assessment and sent us a quote for one that will suit his needs. As part of the 
process to work out if this meets the reasonable and necessary criteria, his planner 
considers other similar shower commodes. 
There’s another commode that’s $5,000 cheaper than the one Elias has asked for. It won’t 
meet Elias’ needs, as it doesn’t provide enough support for his back. That means, it won’t 
achieve the same result as the one Elias has asked for. 
Elias’s planner finds a commode that’s $1,000 cheaper. The planner contacts Elias’s 
occupational therapist who confirms this commode will meet Elias’ needs. 
Elias’ planner decides to fund the commode that’s $1,000 cheaper. This has the same 
features and will have the same benefits for Elias at a substantially lower cost. 
Is the support effective and beneficial? 
We need to be satisfied that the support will be, or is likely to be, effective and beneficial, 
when we consider current good practice. 
We need to work out if the support is likely to be both: 
• effective – it will do what you need it to do35 
• beneficial – the support will help you do things you can’t otherwise do and meets 
your support needs.36 
It can also be effective and beneficial if it will help you maintain your current level of 
functioning. That is, it will help you keep doing the things you can currently do. And it’ll help 
you maintain your work, study and social life as much as you can.37 
When we decide if a support is effective and beneficial, we look at what is current good 
practice. This means we look at if there is evidence that the support works for someone with 
similar disability support needs to you. We won’t need an expert opinion or report for every 
support, because we can often rely on other evidence. 
For example: 
• We may have information already about whether the support is widely accepted to 
suit someone with your disability support needs.38 For example, we could rely on 
academic research and other literature. This could include university studies on 
therapies that have been published and referred in academic journals, evidence-
based practice resources, or clinical practice guidelines. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 10 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
• If you or other participants have used the support before, we can consider your 
experience and the experience of your family members and carers.39 
We may consider things we’ve learnt from other participants in the NDIS with similar support 
needs to you.40 We know you’re the expert in your own life, and we use your own experience 
as much as we can. 
For example, we’ll talk to you about any supports that have helped you do things you can’t 
otherwise do. Or some supports may have helped maintain your ability to be as independent 
as possible. 
If it’s a new support such as new assistive technology, we might fund a trial. This is so we 
can learn from your experience of using the support to check if it’s likely to do what you need 
it to. 
Your evidence can be particularly useful when it’s consistent with other evidence, or if we 
don’t have expert evidence. 
We’ll look at the opinions held by the majority of experts and what they generally agree on.41 
Sometimes we’ll have to seek expert opinion or report to make a decision.42 
Example 
Vivek is 12 and has a goal to improve his communication skills. He and his family want him 
to improve his social skills with the kids in his class. 
When he was younger, Vivek’s family tried speech therapy, and believe it really helped him 
improve his communication. His family told his planner about how it helped Vivek learn how 
to respond to different social settings. 
Vivek’s speech therapist also believes it could work well for him now and help him interact 
with his classmates. 
When deciding if the therapy is effective and beneficial, Vivek’s planner will consider: 
• how speech therapy has helped Vivek in the past, including first-hand information 
from Vivek, his family members, and carers 
• the reports or assessments from his speech therapist on the effectiveness and 
benefits of speech therapy for Vivek 
• other information or expert evidence about the effectiveness and benefits of speech 
therapy, including for children of the same age, with the same disability and functional 
capacity. 
Based on this information and evidence, Vivek’s planner decides the speech therapy is 
effective and beneficial. If it meets the other funding criteria, we will be able to fund speech 
therapy in Vivek’s plan. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 11 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Is the support something we would reasonably expect your informal supports, like 
family or friends, to provide? 
We need to be satisfied that funding the support takes into account what is reasonable to 
expect families, carers, informal networks and the community to provide.43 
To make sure we understand how disability supports might work for you, we consider: 
• the things you’re able to do for yourself 
• any support you have from others in your network – including family members, 
relatives, friends and local community services. 
When we fund supports under the NDIS, we need to consider if it’s reasonable to expect 
your informal supports to provide that support. We can’t fund supports that an ordinary 
person would think is reasonable to expect friends, family or the community to provide for 
you.44 
Informal supports are the help and support you get from friends, family and the community. 
They are called ‘informal’ because you don’t pay for them, and they’re not part of a formal 
agreement. They’re the usual things friends and family do for us, and with us. 
Most of us get some kind of help and support from friends and family. In our society, we 
expect that friends, family and our community will support each other and help each other 
out when they need it. 
A good example is families who have young children. In our community, we expect families 
will provide most of the support a young child needs.45 They will care for the child, make sure 
they’re safe and drive them around places. 
Grandparents, uncles and aunties often have a role to play in supporting young children as 
well. Neighbours and friends might also help care for the child. 
As a child gets older, our society’s expectations of the role of the family and community in 
caring for the child changes. For example, we expect schools to provide a child’s learning 
needs. 
We also usually expect the role of family in providing personal care for a child would reduce 
as they get older and develop new skills and independence. But families are usually still 
responsible for things like food, emotional support, decision-making and providing a safe 
home. 
It’s a similar idea for adults. Our society expects that adults – like family, friends and 
neighbours – will provide some support to each other. This might be things like taking a 
friend with you to the football game or providing emotional support if someone is upset. 

===== PAGE 12 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 12 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
NDIS supports won’t ever replace the support people like your friends and family provide to 
you. This support is given freely because people care and is often quite different to supports 
bought with NDIS funding. 
You have a special bond with your friends and family that’s different from your relationship 
with paid carers. And there are potential risks and problems for you if your friends and 
families become your paid carers. 
We also must consider the benefits you may get from your informal supports. For example, 
your family and friends may be better at helping you meet other people, or helping to build 
your social skills, than paid supports. 
We consider if we can help these relationships so that you get the support you need.46 For 
example, we may be able to fund training for your informal supports, so they can help you 
build your skills. 
We also think about the capacity of your informal supports to continue caring for you, for 
example if they’re ageing or sick. 
There are different things the law for the NDIS says we need to consider for adults and 
children. 
If you’re under 18, we consider what support is reasonable to expect parents to provide at 
your age. It’s normal for parents to provide substantial care and support for children.47 We 
consider that it’s usual for parents to provide almost all the care and support that young 
children need. 
For example, it’s reasonable to expect parents or other family members to provide transport 
to and from their child’s after-school activities. Of course, the amount of care and support for 
a child without a disability would typically reduce as they get older. 
For children under 18, we consider: 
• if your needs are substantially greater because of your disability, compared to other 
children the same age.48 This means you need much more disability support 
• any risks to the wellbeing of people providing informal support to you49 
• if including funding for the support will help build your skills and capacity in the future 
or reduce any risks to you.50 
For example, we consider any health, safety or other impacts resulting from what’s involved 
in meeting your disability support needs. 
If you’re over 18, we consider: 
• if there are any risks to you or your informal supports if you rely on them to provide 
the support you need51 

===== PAGE 13 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 13 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
• how much your informal supports would help improve or reduce your independence 
and other outcomes.52 
We also consider the suitability of informal supports to provide the supports you need,53 
including: 
• how old your carers are and their capacity to provide the support54 
• if other family members and the community can help your informal supports in their 
caring role55 
• the intensity and type of support you need, and if it’s appropriate for your informal 
supports to provide this, based on their age and gender56 
• any long-term risks to the wellbeing of your informal supports.57 
When we consider the risks for people over 18, we consider if the supports are sustainable 
for your informal supports. We consider the health, safety and other impacts on family and 
carers in the long term. 
For example, we wouldn’t expect a child to have their schooling affected because they need 
to provide care. We also wouldn’t expect an elderly parent to be responsible for physical 
activities, if it may result in injury.58 
We generally don’t fund family members to provide supports funded under the NDIS. There 
are very limited situations where we can consider this. 
Learn more about Sustaining informal supports. 
Example 1 
Simon is getting his first plan. For the last 15 years, Simon and his wife Jan’s preference was 
that Jan provide all the physical support he needs at home, such as toileting, showering and 
dressing. 
But as Jan is getting older, it’s not safe for her to do this. It’s becoming risky for both Jan and 
Simon to keep providing this support informally. 
Jan and Simon think it might be best for someone else to provide the personal care support 
that Simon needs. Their children have moved out of home, and it’s not reasonable to expect 
them to help Simon with personal care. 
Based on this information and other evidence, Simon’s planner decides that the personal 
care support meets this criteria. It takes into account what is reasonable for his family and 
others to provide. If the personal care support meets the other funding criteria, we may fund 
the personal care support for Simon. 

===== PAGE 14 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 14 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Simon and Jan still prefer Jan to do the other support Simon needs though, such as helping 
Simon eat his meals. At this time, we wouldn’t fund a support worker in Simon’s plan to help 
him eat his meals. It’s reasonable to expect Jan to help Simon with this, because it’s what 
they want to do and it’s not a safety risk for Jan or Simon. 
Example 2 
Qing is 14 and wants to join a local chess club. Like most 14-year-olds in this situation, she 
needs someone to drop her off and pick her up from the mid-week and weekend gatherings. 
But unlike most 14-year-olds, she needs someone to help her get dressed before she can go 
to the chess club. Her parents have been doing this, but as Qing is getting older, she no 
longer wants her family to help her get dressed. 
It’s reasonable to expect her family or other informal supports to drop Qing to and from the 
match and training sessions. So, we wouldn’t fund transport in Qing’s plan. 
But at age 14, it’s not reasonable to expect her family to help her get dressed. 
Based on this information and other evidence, Qing’s planner finds that the personal care 
support considers what is reasonable for family and others to provide. If it meets the other 
funding criteria, we may fund personal care support in her plan. 
Is the support an NDIS support for you? 
A support will only be an NDIS support for you if either: 
• the Rules say that the support is a NDIS support for everyone, or 
• the Rules say that the support is only for a specific group of people, and you are part 
of that group.59 
NDIS supports are the services, items, and equipment that can be funded under the NDIS. 
Remember, we can only fund a support if it is: 
• an NDIS support for you 
• necessary for your disability.60 
Go to NDIS supports to find more information on what is and isn’t an NDIS support. 
Example 
Max has a spinal cord injury and uses a manual wheelchair to move around. His home has a 
carport at the front. The path from the carport to the front door is too narrow for his 
wheelchair and the uneven ground makes it unsafe for him to use his wheelchair on his own. 
In Max’s planning meeting, he requests the installation of a pathway from the carport to the 
front door to enable safe access to his home. 

===== PAGE 15 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 15 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Max’s planner checks that the home modifications are an NDIS support. 
Because Max needs a pathway to access his house safely, the planner decides that the 
home modifications are an NDIS support. 
What types of supports can’t be funded or provided under the NDIS? 
Under the law for the NDIS, there are things we can’t fund or provide.61 We can’t fund goods 
and services that are not NDIS supports.62 For example, we can’t fund or provide supports 
that: 
• consist of sexual services and sex work, alcohol, or drugs63 
• are not legal64 
• are income replacement65 
• are likely to cause harm to you, or pose a risk to other people66 
• relate to a ‘day-to-day living cost’, like groceries, rent or utilities67 
• duplicate other supports provided by the NDIS under alternative funding68 
• include tickets to events or the cost of going on a holiday.69 
For more information on what we can’t fund, go to NDIS supports. 
What else do you need to know about deciding if supports meet the NDIS funding 
criteria? 
From our experience, we learned there are some common misunderstandings about how we 
work out what supports meet the NDIS funding criteria. 
Why don’t we always fund what your health professionals recommend? 
Although we take expert opinions into account, we can’t and don’t always fund everything 
your health professional might recommend. This is because every support we fund needs to 
meet all the NDIS funding criteria. 
For example, your therapist might recommend a piece of equipment on the basis that it will 
be ‘effective and beneficial’ for you. But if there is something cheaper that will achieve the 
same outcome, we won’t be able to fund what the therapist recommended. 
This is because it may not be value for money. We may be able to fund the cheaper option 
instead if it meets all the NDIS funding criteria. 
Why don’t we fund the same supports as your last plan? 
We might fund different supports in your next plan. This is because we will fund supports in 
your plan based on how we use the NDIS funding criteria at that point in time. 

===== PAGE 16 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 16 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Your needs and situation will most likely change over time. This means it’s likely your NDIS 
supports and needs for those supports will change over time. 
For example, we may have funded supports to help you build your skills in a particular area. 
Once you have built those skills, you won’t need funding for that anymore. So, we probably 
won’t include that funding for those supports in your next plan. 
Supports to build your skills may have met the NDIS funding criteria before, but the same 
supports might not meet the criteria in the future. 
Or your disability support needs might increase or decrease over time. This may mean we 
consider funding more or less supports as a result. 
What else do we consider when deciding what to include in your plan? 
As far as possible, we have to act according to principles set out in the law for the NDIS.70 
These principles guide us when we make decisions about what we can fund. 
These principles don’t override or replace the NDIS funding criteria under the law for the 
NDIS. They can help us apply the funding criteria, by giving us more guidance when we 
decide what supports to approve in your plan. 
The principles include the following: 
• You have the same right as other Australians to realise your potential for physical, 
social, emotional, and intellectual development.71 
• You should be supported to take part in and contribute to social and economic life.72 
• You should be supported to make choices about planning and how your supports will 
be delivered. This includes taking reasonable risks, so you can pursue your goals.73 
• You have the same right as other Australians to decide your own best interests. You 
have the right to be an equal partner in decisions that affect your life.74 
• Your privacy and dignity should be respected.75 
• We must make sure the NDIS is financially sustainable.76 
The principles also tell us that the reasonable and necessary supports we fund should:77 
• support you to pursue your goals and maximise your independence 
• support you to live independently and to be included in the community as a fully 
participating citizen 
• develop and support your capacity to do things that help you participate in the 
community and employment. 

===== PAGE 17 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 17 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
Just because a support helps you do these things doesn’t mean we’ll fund it in your plan. All 
supports we fund need to meet all the NDIS funding criteria. 
We consider these principles set out in the law for the NDIS, along with the principles we 
follow to create your plan. 
How do we think about an ordinary life when deciding what supports to include in 
your plan? 
To help guide us in our decision-making about reasonable and necessary supports, we took 
advice from the NDIS Independent Advisory Council (The Council). 
The Council represents people with disability and carers, bringing their own lived experience 
and expertise of disability. They give us advice on how the NDIS should work. 
The Council advised us that all Australians, including people with disability, should have an 
‘ordinary life’. They also told us we should think about the idea of an ordinary life when we 
apply our principles and use the NDIS funding criteria. 
An ordinary life is a life where you have the same opportunities as people without a disability. 
An ordinary life is one that is typical or usual for everyone in modern day Australia. It’s a life 
where you can pursue your potential and participate in society on an equal basis with others. 
An ordinary life will be different for different people. We are all different and come from 
different cultures and backgrounds. We each have our own values, experiences, beliefs, and 
goals. 
But there are some common things that can improve the quality of our lives and help us 
participate equally. These are the things, such as the following, that make up an ordinary life: 
• Positive relationships with families and informal support networks. 
• Individual autonomy. This means being free and independent, and having the same 
opportunities as people without disability. 
• Active involvement in decision-making including the ability to make meaningful 
decisions, and exercise choice and control. 
• Using your strengths in ways that provide a challenge and enjoyment. 
• A sense of belonging to our families, friendship networks, communities, workplaces 
and society. 
• Active involvement and contribution to society and your community. 
An ‘ordinary life’ in the context of the NDIS involves supporting you to: 
• have and maintain good relationships 
• belong and participate in your community 

===== PAGE 18 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 18 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
• be involved in making choices about your own life. 
One way we can help you have an ordinary life is to support you to access mainstream, 
community, or informal supports wherever possible. These are the usual supports that 
everyone in the community uses. 
When we fund reasonable and necessary supports under the NDIS, we need to make sure 
they meet the NDIS funding criteria. 
When we apply the NDIS funding criteria and make decisions about reasonable and 
necessary supports, we’re guided by the principles in the law for the NDIS. We also consider 
how the supports will best help you to live an ordinary life. 
What other services or systems are responsible for providing supports? 
We have to be satisfied that the support is considered an NDIS support which means the 
support is something that can be funded or provided through the NDIS. Some supports are 
not considered an NDIS support because they’re more appropriately funded or provided 
through: 
• other service systems or supports offered by a person, agency or body (like a State or 
Territory Statutory Scheme) 
• services or supports offered as part of a universal service obligation (like the health or 
education system) 
• services or supports offered in line with reasonable adjustments required under 
discrimination laws (like your employer, or the health or education system).78 
We won’t fund the support if the support should be provided by someone else, even if the 
other service system doesn’t actually provide it. We don’t make up for other organisations 
and systems that don’t provide the supports they should. 
The list of goods and services that are not NDIS supports includes supports that are 
considered the responsibility of service systems such as: 
• Health 
• Mental health 
• Child protection and family support 
• Early childhood development 
• School education 
• Higher education and vocational education and training 
• Employment 

===== PAGE 19 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 19 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
• Housing and community infrastructure 
• Transport 
• Justice. 
For more information, go to Mainstream and community supports. 
How does the NDIS work with other government services? 
We call supports provided by other government services, including those provided as part of 
a universal service obligation, ‘mainstream supports’. When we talk about mainstream 
supports, we mean supports available to everyone in your state or territory, or across 
Australia, regardless of if you have a disability. 
This includes services provided by state and federal governments, related to health care, 
education and mental health services. 
You have the same right as all Australians to access these services. There are certain things 
that mainstream services have to do to make their services accessible for people with 
disability. Using mainstream supports can also help you be part of your community, or to 
work or study. 
When we fund NDIS supports, we won’t fund supports that are not considered NDIS 
supports because the support is more appropriately funded or provided by a mainstream 
service or system, such as the education system or health system.79 Under the law for the 
NDIS, we can’t fund supports that should be provided by a mainstream service. 
The Australian federal, state and territory governments agreed on responsibilities for funding 
different types of supports. The law for the NDIS has an outline of funding responsibilities 
and were developed with the agreement of each State and Territory.80 
Learn more about who is responsible for the supports you need. 
What is reasonable adjustment and why is it important? 
People with a disability can sometimes face barriers that make it harder to do the same 
things as people who don’t have a disability. For example, it might be harder to find and keep 
a job. Or it might be harder to get in and around places, or to get the same services as other 
people. 
It’s against the law to discriminate against people with a disability in many areas.81 This 
includes in employment, when providing goods and services, and when accessing public 
places. 
This means organisations or people who are responsible for providing these services have to 
make what are called ‘reasonable adjustments’. They have to make sure people with a 
disability have equal access to the services they provide, as far as is reasonable. 

===== PAGE 20 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 20 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
They have to do reasonable things that will make their services equally available to 
everyone, whether or not you have a disability. 
Reasonable adjustments do not mean they have to provide everything you need because of 
your disability. It means they have to do what’s reasonable to make sure you have equal 
access to employment, public spaces or services. This takes into account what they can 
afford to do and what is reasonable to expect them to provide in the circumstances. 
When we decide what supports to include in your plan, we need to consider what should be 
provided through reasonable adjustments. Under the law for the NDIS, we can’t fund a 
support if it should be provided by someone else through reasonable adjustments. 
What about in-kind supports? 
We agreed that state and territory governments will keep providing some supports for a 
period of time. We call these ‘in-kind supports’. 
If we fund in-kind supports like specialist school transport or personal care in schools, you 
will need to use state or territory government providers for these supports. These supports 
are most efficiently and effectively provided by state and territory government providers.82 
Learn more about Work and study supports. 
For most other in-kind supports, you can choose your provider if you don’t want to use your 
in-kind provider anymore. We can let you choose another provider if we consider that the 
support isn’t most effectively and efficiently provided by the in-kind provider. 
We usually let you choose another provider if: 
• another provider can give you the same support or level of support as the in-kind 
provider 
• the supports with the new provider still meet the NDIS funding criteria, including that 
they’re value for money compared to the in-kind support 
• there are no serious risks with changing providers. 
Learn more about in-kind supports. 
How do we include the reasonable and necessary supports in your plan? 
Once we’ve identified the supports, and decided they meet the NDIS funding criteria, we can 
include the description and funding for the NDIS support in your plan. 
If the support doesn’t meet the NDIS funding criteria, we can’t include the support in your 
plan. We may consider if a differently described support meets the NDIS funding criteria 
instead. 

===== PAGE 21 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 21 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
When we approve your plan, we’ll also make sure all your supports are reasonable and 
necessary when considered as a package of supports.83 
Sometimes you might not need any supports under the NDIS. For example, your informal 
supports may meet all your disability support needs. If so, we’ll approve a plan with no 
funded supports. 
Learn more about how we create and approve your plan. 
Learn more about using the funding in your plan. 
Learn more about changing your plan. 
What happens if we don’t include the supports you want? 
If we decide a support doesn’t meet the NDIS funding criteria, we can’t include the support in 
your plan. Also, if the amount of support you want doesn’t meet the criteria, we can’t include 
that amount in your plan. 
But, we’re committed to our principles and helping you live an ordinary life. Even if we can’t 
fund a particular support, we may still be able to help. 
If the support doesn’t meet the NDIS funding criteria, we can consider if a different support 
meets the NDIS funding criteria. We might be able to consider describing the support 
differently or funding a different type of support. 
Or we may be able to connect you to mainstream or community supports that can help. 
Mainstream and community supports are available to everyone. They can be a good way to 
connect with your local community, learn new skills and gain independence. 
There are lots of ways we might be able to help, so talk to us if you’re in this situation. We 
can do this at any time. We may be able to help before we approve your plan. 
We’ll give you the reasons for our decision to approve your plan in writing.84 You can contact 
us if you’d like more detail about the reasons for our decision. 
What happens if I want to replace a support for something else? 
We fund NDIS supports in your plan. NDIS laws set out what we can and can’t fund.85 
Sometimes, we may agree that you can spend your funding on supports that are not NDIS 
supports. We call this a ‘replacement support’. Go to Your plan for more information. For 
more information about replacement supports, go to NDIS supports. 
What if you don’t agree with our decision? 
If we decide the supports you requested don’t meet our NDIS funding criteria, we can’t 
include them in your plan. 

===== PAGE 22 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 22 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
If you’d like more details about the supports that make up your plan’s total funding amount, 
we can send this to you. You can contact us and ask for a Budget Breakdown. 
We’ll give you written reasons why we made the decision. You can contact us if you’d like 
more detail about the reasons for our decision. 
If you don't agree with a decision we make about what supports to include in your plan, you 
can ask for an internal review of our decision.86 
You’ll need to ask for an internal review within 3 months of getting your plan.87 
Learn more about reviewing our decisions. 
Reference List 
 
1 NDIS Act s 34(1)(aa). 
2 NDIS Act and delegated legislation made under the NDIS Act, especially NDIS (Supports for Participants) 
Rules and NDIS (Plan Management) Rules. 
3 NDIS Act s 34 (1)(aa); NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 5.1(b). 
4 NDIS Act ss 33(2)(a), 33(2)(b), 33(5)(c), 34. 
5 NDIS Act ss 13, 33(2)(a). 
6 NDIS Act s 34 (1). 
7 NDIS Act s 10. 
8 NDIS Act and delegated legislation made under the NDIS Act, especially NDIS (Supports for Participants) 
Rules and NDIS (Plan Management) Rules. 
9 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 2.4; NDIS Act s 33(5)(c). 
10 NDIS Act s 34(1)(f). 
11 NDIS Act ss 33(5)(d), 35(1)(b); NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules pt 5.  
12 NDIS Act ss 33(5)(c), 34(1). 
13 NDIS Act s 34(1)(aa); NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 5.1(b). 
14 NDIS Act s 34(1)(a). 
15 NDIS Act s 34(1)(b). 
16 NDIS Act s 34(1)(c). 
17 NDIS Act s 34(1)(d). 
18 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.2(a). 
19 NDIS Act s 34(1)(e). 
20 NDIS Act s 34(1)(f). 
21 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules pts 3, 4. 
22 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 5.1(b), NDIS Act s 34(1)(aa). 
23 NDIS Act s 34(1)(a). 
24 McGarrigle v National Disability Insurance Agency (2017) 252 FCR 121 at [91]. 
25 NDIS Act s 34(1)(a). 
26 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 5.1(d). 
27 NDIS Act s 34(1)(b). 
28 NDIS Act ss 3(3)(b), 4(17). 
29 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.1(a). 
30 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.1(b). 
31 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.1(c). 
32 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.1(e). 
33 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.1(c). 
34 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.1(d). 
35 McCutcheon and NDIA [2015] AATA 624 at [34]. 
 

===== PAGE 23 =====
   
28 MARCH 2025  Reasonable and necessary supports   Page 23 of 23  
This document is correct at the date of publication. 
Always visit ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au for the latest version. 
 
36 McCutcheon and NDIA [2015] AATA 624 at [34]. 
37 McCutcheon and NDIA [2015] AATA 624. 
38 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.2(a). 
39 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.2(b). 
40 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.2(c). 
41 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.3. 
42 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.3. 
43 NDIS Act s 34(1)(e). 
44 NDIS Act s 34(1)(e). 
45 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(a)(i). 
46 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(c). 
47 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(a)(i). 
48 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(a)(ii); JQJT and National Disability Insurance Agency [2016] 
AATA 478 at [39]. 
49 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(a)(iii). 
50 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(a)(iv). 
51 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules rr 3.4(b)(i), (ii). 
52 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(b)(iii). 
53 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(b)(ii). 
54 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(b)(ii). 
55 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(b)(ii)(A). 
56 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(b)(ii)(B). 
57 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(b)(ii)(C). 
58 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 3.4(b)(ii)(C). 
59 NDIS Act s 34(1)(f). 
60 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 5.1(b), NDIS Act s 34(1)(aa). 
61 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 5. 
62 NDIS Act s 10. 
63 NDIS Act s 10. 
64 NDIS Act s 10. 
65 NDIS Act s 10. 
66 NDIS Act s 10. 
67 NDIS Act s 10. 
68 NDIS Act ss 33(5)(d), 35(1)(a); NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules r 5.1(c).  
69 NDIS Act s 10. 
70 NDIS Act ss 4, 31. 
71 NDIS Act s 4(1). 
72 NDIS Act s 4(2). 
73 NDIS Act s 4(4). 
74 NDIS Act s 4(8). 
75 NDIS Act s 4(10). 
76 NDIS Act s 4(17). 
77 NDIS Act s 4(11). 
78 NDIS Act s 34(1)(f). 
79 S10(b1) -(3). 
80 NDIS (Supports for Participants) Rules rr 3.5-3.7, Schedule 1; NDIS Act ss 209(4), (8) item 1. 
81 Disability Discrimination Act 1992 (Cth); Discrimination Act 1991 (ACT); Anti-Discrimination Act 1977 (NSW); 
Anti-Discrimination Act 1996 (NT); Anti-Discrimination Act 1991 (Qld); Equal Opportunity Act 1984 (SA); Anti-
Discrimination Act 1998 (Tas); Equal Opportunity Act 2010 (Vic); Equal Opportunity Act 1984 (WA).  
82 NDIS (Plan Management) Rules r 6.6. 
83 NDIS Act s 33(5)(c). 
84 NDIS Act s100(1). 
85 NDIS Act s 10. 
86 NDIS Act s 100. 
87 NDIS Act s 100(2). 